---
title: "What are the Benefits of Fasting?"
date: 2025-08-10
weight: 4
description: "How to fast properly"
image: "/covers/2014.png"
writer:
  name: Juan
  url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/jundalisay/
---



The food crisis from 2022, as well as the starvation in Gaza and Sudan, have put renewed importance on global food security. This has been complicated by the increase in global warming disasters which directly affect food production. 

Since the pandemic, researchers have pushed forward solutions such as urban farming, drought-resistant grains, and circular economy in order to address the worsening problems with food security. 

Few people have pushed for fasting in order to chip away food insecurity, thinking that it would be similar to putting off a house fire by using a bucket. But if many people practice fasting regularly, then food purchases and therefore food waste also declines (though this is opposite in Ramadan-style fasts which are broken by feasts).

As such, it would be advantageous to show the benefits of non-religious fasting in order to reduce unnecessary food consumption and waste. But first, we give examples of religious fasting.


## Religious Fasting

Unlike modern fasting, religious fasting has different rules

1. Islam

Fasting in Islam without food, drink, and sexual relations from dawn until sunset. This is broken by a celebratory meal called Iftar.

2. Catholic / Christian

Fasting in Catholicism is done during the Lenten season, particularly on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday.

3. Buddhist

Fasting in Buddhism is done on "Uposatha" days, which are significant lunar dates.

4. Hindu

Fasting in Hinduism is done on "Ekadashi" and on other specific days depending on sect.  



## Non-Religious Fasting

Recently, this has become mainstream as intermittent fasting as a weight loss solution and a way to deal with obesity.

The main versions are:

1. The 5:2 Diet 

This is allotting 2 days with lower food intake. 

2. Alternate-Day Fasting

This is fasting on one day and eating normally the other day.

3. 16/8 or 14/10 Method

This is fasting for 16 hours or 14 hours and eating within an 8-hour or 10-hour window. 


## Benefits 

The known benefits of fasting are: 

1. Reduced Fat and Cholesterol 

Weekly fasting can reduce total cholesterol (10%–21%) and triglycerides or fat (14%–42%). This is because the lack of food triggers the body to use up its stored fat for energy.

2. Diabetes

Intermittent fasting, such as 5:2, can help lower blood glucose levels. This can be particularly beneficial for people with diabetes.

This is still an effect of the body using up the excess energy as fat in cells, which require insulin to be extracted. And so fasting helps improves insulin sensitivity, leading to a better management of energy storage by the body. 

3. Hormonal Changes

The lack of food triggers the body to conserve energy and use it better by adjusting the hormones.

On the positive, this makes some fasting persons more alert while having clear minds. 

On the negative, this makes other fasting persons more irritable and anxious. 

Their disposition during fasting helps expose their mentality as being more inclined into spirituality if they become calm and clearer-headed, and into physicality if they become irritable and negative. 


## The Best Way to Break a Fast: Saltwater Flush

Fasting lets the body clean itself of toxins accumulated from the food previously eaten. The saltwater flush is the best and cheapest way to get rid of such toxins at the end of a fast:

1. Dissolve two teaspoons of salt in one liter of warm water.
2. Add lemon juice.
3. Drink the mixture as quickly as possible on an empty stomach.

This will make you have a bowel movement shortly.
